

=== [p1] ===
 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design of a Reverb Plugin and Evaluation of the Quality of 
Convolution Reverb 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KAAN SHENHUY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BSc (Hons) Sound Engineering and Production 
 
 
 
May 2014 
 
 
 
 


=== [p2] ===
 
ii 
 
 
 
 
 
Design of a Reverb Plugin and Evaluation of the Quality of 
Convolution Reverb 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KAAN SHENHUY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisor: Dr. Ryan Stables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p3] ===
 
iii 
Abstract 
 
Convolution reverb is the process used for reverberating a signal by an impulse 
response of an actual space. The product of this operation is a third signal, 
containing reverberation of the space where the impulse response is captured. This 
project is based on creating a convolution reverb plugin on MaxMSP and evaluating 
the perceptual quality of convolution reverb. 
 
 
The real-time fast convolution reverb plugin was implemented using multiple 
frequency delay line non-uniform partitioned convolution method on MaxMSP. An 
experimental design methodology was introduced in order to evaluate the perceptual 
quality of convolution reverb. In order to realise, anechoic drum kit music samples 
were recorded and re-recorded in a chamber to form the control signal. Also, using 
same equipment and setup, an impulse response was captured in the same chamber 
to form the test sample. These samples were then used for subjective analysis in a 
pair-wise categorical preference type listening test. The samples were also analysed 
in their spectrogram views in order to analyse the quality objectively. 
 
 
Listening tests were designed so that realism, quality and personal preference 
categories were present. Null hypothesis was proved, where the realism difference of 
the two samples resulted in 52% of the participants preferring chamber reverb 
(control signal). However personal preference category resulted in 61%of the 
subjects preferring the chamber reverb. This was justified by objective analysis, 
where the convolution reverb shown to be having a faster decay rate for high 
frequency bands, thus sounding unnatural. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p4] ===
 
iv
Acknowledgements 
 
 
I would like to thank to my family, Resat Shenhuy, Ilhamiye Shenhuy and Boran 
Shenhuy for their unconditional support throughout my entire life. 
 
Also I would like to thank to my mentors and teachers who supported me in my 
education life. 
 
And lastly, I would like to thank to my partner Damla Kiral for her unconditional love 
and support throughout my hardest times.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p5] ===
 
v
Contents 
 
Abstract                                                                                                                       iii 
Acknowledgements                                                                                                     iv 
Contents                                                                                                                      v 
List of figures                                                                                                               vi                            
1.0 Introduction                                                                                                            1 
1.1 Problem definition                                                                                      1 
1.2 Scope                                                                                                         1 
1.3 Rationale                                                                                                   1 
1.4 Aims                                                                                                           2 
1.5 Objectives                                                                                                  2 
1.6 Background information                                                                             2 
                                                                         
2.0 Review of existing knowledge                                                                               4 
2.1 Introduction                                                                                                4 
2.2 The propagation of sound                                                                         4 
2.3 Reflection and sound in enclosed spaces                                                 7 
2.4 Reverberation                                                                                            9 
2.5 Digital Audio                                                                                             12 
2.6 Real-time convolution algorithms                                                             17   
2.7 Earlier studies on evaluation of the quality of artificial reverberation       17 
 
3.0 Methodology                                                                                                        19 
3.1 Hardware                                                                                                 19 
3.2 Software                                                                                                   21                            
3.3 Plugin design                                                                                           24 
3.4 Impulse response capture methodology                                                  26 
3.5 Anechoic chamber recordings                                                                  27 
3.6 Experimental design                                                                                 28 
 
4.0 Results                                                                                                                 31 
4.1 Spectral tests’ results                                                                               31  
4.2 Listening test results                                                                                34 
 
 
5.0 Discussion and analysis                                                                                      38 
5.1 Analysis of spectrogram results                                                               38 
5.2 Analysis of subjective test results                                                            39 
 
6.0 Conclusions                                                                                                         41 
7.0 Recommendations                                                                                               43 
List of references                                                                                                       44 
Appendix A: Listening Test Questionnaire                                                                49 
Appendix B: Digital Files                                                                                            51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p6] ===
 
vi
List of Figures and Tables 
 
Figure 1.1 Motion of air molecules                                                4 
Figure 1.1.1 Sound Intensity                                                         6 
Figure 1.2 Specular reflections and diffuse reflections                  7 
Figure 1.3 Individual Reflections                                                   9 
Figure 1.4 DFT Terminologies                                                     12 
Figure 1.5 Block diagrams of FIR and IIR filters                          13 
Figure 1.6 Delta function                                                              14 
Figure 1.7 Convolution operations                                               14 
Figure 1.8 the convolution machine                                             15 
Table 1 Available measurement microphones                             19  
Table 2 Available monitor loudspeakers                                      20 
Table 3 Available portable audio interfaces                                 21 
Table 4 Possible programming software comparison                  22 
Table 5 Possible impulse response capturing software               23 
Figure 3.4.1 first prototypes                                                         24 
Figure 3.4.2 Convolution sub-patch for the left channel              25 
Figure 3.4.3 Working patch                                                         26 
Figure 4.1.1 Spectrogram of bass drum (chamber recording)     31 
Figure 4.1.2 Spectrogram of bass drum (convolved signal)        31 
Figure 4.1.3 Spectrogram of snare (chamber recording)            32 
Figure 4.1.4 Spectrogram of snare (convolved signal)                32 
Figure 4.1.5 Spectrogram of ride cymbal (chamber recording)   33 
Figure 4.1.6 Spectrogram of ride cymbal (convolved signal)      33 
Table 6 Indıvidual listening test results                                       34 
Table 7 Participants’ comments                                                  35 
Figure 4.2.1 Realism category                                                    36 
Figure 4.2.2 Quality category                                                      36 
Figure 4.2.3 Personal preference category                                 37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p7] ===
 
1 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Problem definition 
 
Convolution reverb is an effect used to reverberate a signal by convolving the signal 
with an impulse response of an actual space. Any physical space can be emulated 
by using this technique, thus it is a widely used artificial reverberation technique for 
film and audio applications. Although its wide use, lack of a freely available MaxMSP 
plugin is an issue.  Another problem in this subject is that the deficiency of a reliable 
study comparing convolution reverb to a natural reverb such as a chamber reverb.  
 
 
1.2 Scope 
 
The scope of this project covers activities needed associated with the achievement of 
objectives stated in 1.5.  These include research for implementing real-time, fast 
convolution and carefully designing of the listening tests to truly assess the perceived 
quality of convolution reverberation. The scope of this project does not cover the 
testing of the other auralisation approaches and research for the objective analysis 
tools of the artificial reverberation algorithms.   
 
1.3 Rationale 
 
The topic was chosen in order to provide a freely available MaxMSP plugin for 
convolution reverberation for digital media industries and to provide a reliable study 
on the evaluation the quality of convolution reverb compared to natural reflections in 
a physical space. Frequency analysis and listening tests will supply both subjective 
and objective analysis on the quality of convolution reverb. The product of this project 
can benefit a large scale of amateurs and professionals working in the digital media 
industry. 
 
 
Convolution reverb can be widely used in many digital media industries like TV, film 
and games where the receiver should get an accurate perception of space when 
audio is convolved with the impulse response of the target space. This means 


=== [p8] ===
 
2 
impulse responses for convolution reverb must be recorded from the target for audio 
and games, or actual spaces for film industry. 
 
Convolution also can be used for adding other effects to the signal rather than 
reverb. This project will design and conduct experiments for subjective evaluation of 
the perceptual quality of convolution as a reverb effect. 
 
 
1.4 Aims 
 
To design a fast convolution patch on Max/MSP and to evaluate quality of 
convolution reverb compared to recordings from the physical space from which 
impulse response recorded. 
 
1.5 Objectives 
 
• 
To recall the theories and processes behind real-time convolution and 
efficient collection of impulse responses. 
• 
To design a Fast Convolution patch on Max/MSP 
• 
To record IR for testing the patch 
• 
To apply the patch on recorded IR and perform frequency analysis 
• 
To create testing criteria for listening tests 
• 
To perform listening tests 
• 
To evaluate with respect to frequency analysis and listeners‘ opinions 
 
 
1.6 Background information 
 
Artificial reverberation has been a tool used in commercial music recording nearly a 
century, with the methods of chamber reverberators in early days, spring 
reverberators in late 1930’s, plate reverberators in late 1950’s and with the rise of the 
digital age and digital signal processing methodologies and tools, digital 
reverberators and finally convolution reverb for the last 30 years. However real-time 
convolution reverb is fairly new to the industry as opposed to the techniques stated 


=== [p9] ===
 
3 
above. The implementation of real-time, fast convolution reverb was viable with 
regards to high CPU power of recent years.  
 
 
Testing the quality of artificial reverberators has been a common and important 
subject among the researchers through last four decades. However these studies are 
focused on the different techniques of artificial reverberators rather than convolution 
reverb. The latest papers on this subject were published in 2007. These studies are 
mentioned and analysed in the later sections of this report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p10] ===
 
4 
 
2.0 Review of Existing Knowledge 
 
2.1 Introduction 
 
This section combines the existing knowledge with the findings from broad research 
into areas of propagation of sound, reverberation, digital signal processing, artificial 
reverberation techniques and methods of evaluation of the quality of artificial 
reverberation that are crucial for understanding the concept and findings of this 
paper. 
 
 
2.2 The propagation of sound 
 
Sound is a mechanical wave motion that travels in air or other elastic media and can 
be perceived by humans or other animals (Everest and Pohlmann 2009). 
Propagation of sound is often described as air molecules moving back and forth 
forming pressure variations above and below atmospheric pressure called 
compressions (region of high pressure) and rarefactions (region of low pressure) (fig. 
1.1). 
 
 
 
Fig.  1.1 Motion of air particles (taken from Master Handbook of Acoustics, 2009) 
 
 
  
 
 


=== [p11] ===
 
5 
Speed of sound in air can be calculated by the following equation: 
 
 
!!"# =  
!!"#
!!"#
=  
ℸ!
(!"
!" )
=  
ℸ!"
! 
 
Where ! = the pressure of the gas 
! = the equivalent Young’s Modulus of the gas 
! = the gas constant (8.31 ! !!! !"#$!!) 
! = temperature in K 
! = the molecular mass of the gas (! !"#$!!) 
ℸ = the heat capacity ratio of the gas (1.4 for air) 
 
 
2.2.1 Sound Intensity  
 
Howard and Angus (2009) states that ‘sound from a point source is propagated 
spherically and uniformly in all directions’. As the area of a sphere is 4!!!, the area 
of a selected region on a sphere varies as the square of its radius (Everest and 
Pohlmann 2009). Therefore sound intensity diminishes as the square of the radius. 
This is called inverse square law. Figure 1.1.1 shows an example of an area on a 
hemi-spherical sound field formed by a loudspeaker. Everest and Pohlmann states 
that ‘the intensity of a point-source sound in a free field is inversely proportional to 
the square of the distance from the source. Therefore sound intensity of a point 
source can be given by the following formula: 
 
! =   !
4!!! 
 
Where ! = intensity of sound per unit area 
! = power of source 
 ! = distance from source (radius) 
 
 


=== [p12] ===
 
6 
 
Fig. 1.1.1 Sound Intensity (taken from Acoustics and Psychoacoustics, 2009) 
 
 
2.2.2 Sound Power  
 
Sound power is a measure of the total power radiated from a point source in all 
directions (Howard and Angus 2009). It is given the abbreviation SWL. SWL is 
expressed in dB as the logarithm of a ratio of existent power level to a reference level 
of 1 picowatt.  
 
 
!"# = 10!"#!"
!!"#$!%
!!"#
 
 
 
 
Where !!"#$!% = the actual sound power level (in watts)  
and !!"#  = the reference sound power level (10!!" !) 
 
 
2.2.3 Sound Pressure 
 
Although sound intensity is a functional measure of describing the amplitude of a 
sound at a given point, it is not the usual measure for depicting amplitude of the 
sound. Instead, pressure is used (Howard and Angus 2009). Human perception 
capacity encompasses a large dynamic: a factor of 1:1000000, which extends from 


=== [p13] ===
 
7 
20 !"# (threshold of hearing) to 20 !" (threshold of pain) (Mommertz et al 2009). 
Sound pressure level is often expressed in logarithmic scale because the way 
humans perceive sound. It is given as a ratio of actual sound pressure to the human 
threshold of hearing at 1 kHz of 20 !"# (Howard and Angus 2009). 
 
 
!"# = 20!"#!"
!!"#$!%
!!"#
 
 
 
Where !!"#$!% = the actual pressure level (in !") 
!!"# = the reference pressure level (20 !"#) 
 
 
 
2.3 Reflection and sound in enclosed spaces 
 
Howard and Angus (2009) describes free field as ‘… a free space that allows sound 
to travel without interference’. When sound wave hits a hard boundary some of its 
energy is absorbed and some is reflected depending on the size of the boundary 
compared to the wavelength of the sound and absorption coefficient of the materials 
(Rumsey & McCormick, 2006). Angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence if 
the reflecting surface is perfectly flat; this is called specular reflection (fig. 1.2 (a)). If 
the reflecting surface is not smooth, sound is scattered in all directions; this is called 
diffuse reflection (fig. 1.2 (b)) (Peters, 2013).  
 
 
 
                  a)                                                  b) 
 
Fig. 1.2 Specular Reflections (a) and Diffuse Reflections (b) (taken from Acoustics and Noise Control, 
2013) 
 
 


=== [p14] ===
 
8 
 
When sound energy is radiated in a room, direct sound reaches the listener first 
followed by early reflections and reverberation. Perception of early reflections 
determines the acoustical size of the space and the position of the source in the 
space (Howard and Angus 2009). Reflections delayed more than 30 milliseconds are 
perceived as echoes (Haas effect) (Howard and Angus 2009).  
 
The mean free path (MFP) of a room gives the average distance a sound wave 
travels between interactions of surfaces (Everest and Pohlmann 2009). An average 
MFP of a rectangular room can be calculated by using the equation below: 
 
 
!"# =  4!
! 
 
Where !"# = the mean free path (in m) 
! = Volume of the room (in !!) 
! = Surface area of the room (in !!) 
 
 
Therefore an average length of time takes a sound wave to travel between 
successive reflections can be predicted by dividing the MFP by the speed of sound: 
 
 
! =  4!
!" 
 
Where ! = the time between reflections (in !) 
and ! = the speed of sound (in !"!!) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p15] ===
 
9 
2.4 Reverberation 
 
As stated above sound field in an enclosed space is divided in three regions: direct 
sound, early reflections and reverberation. After the direct sound and early reflections 
reaching the ear, a dense sound field is formed by very closely spaced reflections 
from all directions. This region of the sound is called reverberation (Howard and 
Angus 2009). Mommertz (2009) states that the reverberation of a room is the most 
significant acoustic quality feature.  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.3 Individual reflections as impulses on intensity over time graph 
 
Figure 1.3 shows intensity levels of multiple reflections as impulses occurring over 
time. Direct sound can be seen as the most intense single impulse on the graph 
followed by early reflections spaced over time with relatively low intensities and 
reverberant field of dense, less intense reflections decaying exponentially to 
inaudibility. 
 
2.4.1 Reverberation time 
 
The time that it takes sound to decay into inaudibility is called the reverberation time 
(Everest and Pohlmann 2009). It is often given the abbreviation !"!", which accounts 
for pressure level decreasing by 60 dB, into inaudibility. According to Peters (2013), 
W. C. Sabine’s investigation into room acoustics proved that the reverberation time, 
RT, of a room is dependent on its volume and amount of absorption of its surface 
area. Sabine’s formula is the simplest to predict the reverberation time of a space. 
 


=== [p16] ===
 
10
 
!"!" =  !. 16!
!
 
 
 
Where !"!"= reverberation time (in s) 
! = volume of the room 
! = total absorption of the room (in metric Sabins) 
 
Using this equation one can obtain !"!" of a room but the following assumptions and 
limitations should be considered when dealing with large halls: 
 
 
Air absorption is neglected 
 
Audience absorption is neglected 
 
Quantity ! is the total absorption of all the surfaces of the room and it is given 
by ! =  
!!!!, where !! is surface area of the material and !! is the 
absorption coefficient of the material. In most cases doors, windows, seats 
etc. are not taken into account (Everest and Pohlmann 2009). 
 
2.4.2 Artificial reverberation techniques 
 
Everest and Pohlmann points out that music recorded in a ‘dry’ room often miss 
richness of the room sound. In the early days of studio recording, reverberation was 
added to the record by natural means. The process included, placing a loudspeaker 
and a microphone in a reverberant chamber and recording the room’s response. This 
signal was then added to the mix. The reverberation characteristics of a room were 
altered by placement of glass plates around the room. Small reverberation rooms are 
often dictated by room modes, which cause timbral defects. On the other hand large 
halls were often expensive to hire for reverberation purposes. This yielded a search 
for practical solutions for reverberating a signal (White, 2006; Everest and Pohlmann, 
2009).   
 
 
 
 


=== [p17] ===
 
11
2.4.3 Analogue reverb 
 
First approach was spring reverb, where a loudspeaker was coupled at one end of a 
spring and a pickup on the other end. When an audio signal is playing, the waves 
travel along the spring and reach the microphone, but a part of the waves energy is 
reflected and stays in the spring, which creates the sense of reverberation over 
sound (Lehmann, 1996). 
 
Next approach was plate reverberation. In the late 1950’s Elektro-Mass-Technik 
(EMT) introduced EMT 140, a large plate of sheet metal is vibrated by a loudspeaker 
at one side and vibrations picked up by a pickup (two pickups for stereo use). This 
technique gave more control over the reverberation time by a damping pad made 
from framed acoustic tiles (Dennis, 2001). Plate reverberation was widely used in 
commercial recordings; the biggest advantage over spring reverb was its brightness 
(Robjohns, 1997). While this technique was widely used, it was not capable of 
simulating true room acoustics (Bateman, 2002).  
 
2.4.4 Digital reverb 
 
 
With rise of digital signal processing, digital reverb algorithms elevated. The earliest 
approach was a theorised by Schroeder in 1961, where he proposed using a 
combination of allpass and comb filters to create digital delay networks that will form 
early and late reflections that naturally occur in a space (Schroeder, 1961, 1962). 
Later on Moorer, in his 1979 Computer Music Journal article, developed Schroeder’s 
approach but again this method was not capable of emulating a satisfactory true 
room reverberation (Bateman, 2002). 
 
2.4.5 Convolution reverb 
 
Convolution reverberation uses one of the most important digital signal processing 
fundamentals, convolution: an input signal is combined with an impulse response to 
output a third signal. In this method impulse response of a linear time invariant 
system, in this case a room, is convolved with an input signal to truly emulate the 
systems response to an impulse, decay over time.  


=== [p18] ===
 
12
2.5 Digital audio 
 
Manolakis and Ingle (2011) states that ‘… a signal is defined as any physical quantity 
that varies as a function of time, space, or any other variable or variables’. 
Transforming sound waves into electrical currents by a microphone forms audio 
signals. A signal can be decomposed into series of sine and cosine waves called 
Fourier series (Smith, 1997). Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier theorized that combining 
enough sine waves one could model any waveform (Howard and Angus 2009). This 
approach has simplified the analysis of any complex waveforms (Howard and Angus 
2009). 
 
 
2.5.1 DFT and FFT 
 
DFT refers to discrete Fourier transform: calculating frequency domain data from a 
given time domain signal (Smith, 1997).  DFT works with discrete and periodic 
signals; therefore it is crucial for understanding the digital signal processing.  
 
 
 
Fig. 1.4 DFT Terminology (taken from The Scientist and Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal Processing, 1997) 
Figure 1.4 shows the application and terminology of DFT. Time domain input signal 
is translated into frequency domain, outputting real !" ! [ ] and imaginary !" ! [ ] 
parts. This technique is very important when performing convolution because it is 
computationally less expensive to perform convolution in frequency domain rather 
than in time domain (Smith, 1997; Lyons, 2004).  
 


=== [p19] ===
 
13
While there are several ways to compute DFT, the most efficient algorithm is the Fast 
Fourier Transform (FFT). Smith (1997) states that FFT reduces computation time by 
hundreds. He further describes the efficiency as ‘flying in a jet aircraft versus walking’ 
(Smith, 1997). It operates by decomposing an N point signal into N signals each 
containing a single point by bit reversal sorting algorithm. After this step each point 
contains frequency spectra of their selves. Last step is to combine N frequency in the 
exact reverse order (Smith, 1997). 
 
 
2.5.2 Digital filters 
 
 
Lyons (2004) states that ‘… filtering is the processing of a time-domain signal 
resulting in some change in that signal’s original spectral contents’. In this case a 
room can be described as a filter, altering the spectra of an impulse giving an 
impulse response. There are two types of digital filters: the Finite Impulse Response 
(FIR) and the Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) (Marven and Ewers 1996). An IIR filter 
uses output samples to feed the input (recursive) therefore its output is infinite. In 
contrast an FIR filter, also known as non-recursive filter, only use current and past 
input samples (Kirk and Hunt 1999). Block diagrams of FIR and IIR filters can be 
seen in fig. 1.5. For this projects purposes FIR filters will be studied.  
 
 
Fig. 1.5 Block diagrams of FIR and IIR filters (taken from Digital Filter Design by Zoran Milivojević) 
 
In fig. 1.5, block diagram of an FIR filter shows input !(!) passing through a system 
depicted as ℎ(!) giving the output !(!). In digital signal processing, this is described 
as: ! ! equals to the convolution of ℎ(!) and !(!) (Lyons, 2004). 
 
 


=== [p20] ===
 
14
2.5.3 Convolution 
 
Smith (2003) states that ‘an impulse is a signal composed of all zeros except a single 
non-zero point’. Delta function is a normalized impulse, where sample number zero 
has a value of one and all other samples have a value of zero. Impulse response is a 
name given to a product signal from a system where delta function is the input 
(Smith, 2003). See fig. 1.6 where ! ! is the delta function and ℎ! is the impulse 
response of a linear system. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.6 Delta Function & Impulse Response (taken from Digital Signal Processing) 
 
Convolution is a mathematical operation just like addition and subtraction that is used 
in digital signal processing for describing linear time-invariant systems and designing 
filters. In figure 1.7 convolution is abbreviated as ‘∗’ which refers to convolution 
operation given in the formula below called convolution integral. 
 
 
Fig. 1.7 Convolution operation (taken from Digital Signal Processing, 2003) 
 
! ! =  
ℎ! !(! −!
!
!!
)!" = ℎ! ∗!(!) 
 
 
The length of the output sample ! (!) is equal to the length of input sample !(!) plus 
impulse response ℎ(!) minus one. For example if the input sample ! (!) consisting 
of 4 points is convolved with a 3-point impulse response ℎ (!) outputs a 6-point 
signal ! (!) (Lynn and Fuerst 1994). 


=== [p21] ===
 
15
2.5.4 Convolution machine 
 
 
Understanding how convolution works is the single most important part of achieving 
the objectives of this project. Steven Smith (2003) suggests studying convolution 
from the viewpoint of output side algorithm in order to understand the practical side 
of this operation. This viewpoint analyses each output sample by finding the 
contributing input points. Figure 1.8 shows a convolution machine, a flow diagram of 
input ! (!) contributes to output ! (!). 
 
 
Fig. 1.8 The convolution machine (taken from S. Smith (2007)). 
 
In figure 1.8, output sample ! (6) is obtained by multiplying ! (6) by ℎ (0), !  5 by 
ℎ (1), ! (4) by ℎ (2) and !  3  by ℎ (3), then by summing up all the values. This 
machine is free to move from left to right or right to left. An important part to 
remember is that impulse response ℎ  ! is flipped. In order to calculate output 
sample ! (0), flipped ℎ  ! is shifted so that sample ℎ0 is in correspondence with 
! (0). But this leaves samples ℎ  1 , ℎ  2 and ℎ (3) in line with the non-existent 


=== [p22] ===
 
16
samples; this problem is overcome by simply adding samples each having a value of 
zero. This is called padding (Smith, 2003). 
 
 
 
2.5.5 Overlap-add method and FFT convolution 
 
 
In order to operate convolution for real-time purposes, ! point input signal is 
segmented into overlapping partitions (!! + !!+. . . ). In this case convolution is 
applied simultaneously and each overlapping product is summed to form the output 
signal. This method is called overlap-add (Lockhart and Barry 1989; Lynn and 
Fuerst, 1994).  
 
For example if a 300-point signal is to be filtered by a 101-point impulse response, 
the output signal will be 400 samples. To implement fast convolution, input sequence 
is broken into 3 segments that are running from 0 to 99, 100 to 199 and 200 to 299. 
The end of the each segment is padded with zero’s to allow overlapping. Each input 
segment is filtered by the 101-point impulse response resulting in a 200-point output 
segment. In order to form output signal, each overlapping output segment is 
summed. For example, to form samples running from 100 -199 output segment 1 (0-
199) is added to output segment 2 (100-299) (Smith, 2003). 
 
Smith (1997) states that after the development of FFT algorithms convolution in 
frequency domain became more efficient than in time domain. FFT Convolution uses 
overlap-add method; only difference is when the segments are transformed in 
frequency domain, calculations are carried out such that real and imaginary parts of 
frequency response and input segments are calculated and then transformed back 
into time domain.    
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p23] ===
 
17
2.6 Real-time convolution algorithms 
 
 
As stated earlier room impulse response (RIR) contains information of the response 
of a reverberant space to an impulse. These RIR’s are often longer than 3 seconds, 
which makes them almost impossible to convolve with an incoming signal for real-
time purposes (Muller-Tomfelde, 1999). In order to realize this operation room 
impulse response is divided into segments where convolution for each block can be 
achieved in parallel with appropriate frequency-domain delay lines (FDL) (Battenberg 
and Avizienis 2011). This method is called uniform partitioned convolution where 
each segment of impulse response is partitioned in uniform block sizes by FFT 
convolution. This method has reduced time required for the operations however it is 
not ideal for real-time purposes. In order to accomplish enough reduction in latency, 
Gardner (1995) suggested using blocks of different lengths. This approach uses 
smaller partitions in the beginning of an IR and exponentially increasing blocks 
towards the end (Battenberg and Avizienis 2011). This further improvement in the 
partitioning scheme has reduced the latency at a stage that real-time convolution is 
now achievable.  
 
 
 
2.7 Earlier studies on evaluation of the quality of artificial reverberation 
techniques (subjective methods) 
 
 
A number of studies have been carried on the evaluation of artificial reverberation 
techniques. Only a small percentage of these studies assessed the perceptual 
differences of artificial reverberation techniques. Czyzewski (1990) in his article on 
Journal of Audio Engineering Society (JAES) suggests the efficiency of paired 
comparison tests for the subjective assessment of reverberation techniques. His 
method assessed the subjective preference of the individuals on a two level 
‘’better/worse’’ scale. On his earlier article (1988) with Sankiewicz, they highlight two 
testing methods, parametric and non-parametric methods. Parametric methods 
include assessing the predetermined parameters of sound. Disadvantage of this 


=== [p24] ===
 
18
method is that the participants have to have significant background in the subject 
area. Non-parametric methods include comparison test methods stated earlier. 
 
Another study carried out by Extra et al. (2006), employed a non-parametric method, 
Two Alternative Forced Choice (2AFC) listening test, similar to the method stated 
above, where participants are expected to compare the same signal reverberated 
with two different algorithms. This study included only one comparison category that 
was which signal sounds more natural. Their study concluded that objective 
measures couldn’t replace listening tests. Another outcome was that drum samples 
are a good starting point for further tests. 
 
In 2007, two more articles were published in the subject area. Marui (2007) has 
created most in-depth and exhaustive listening test, comprising of 225 sound stimuli. 
He asked the participants to relate each of the samples to three parameters 
depending on the amount of reverberation present on each signal. He included three 
test samples: a noise sample, a small orchestral piece and drums music. He also 
points out the importance of recording these test samples in an anechoic 
environment. 
 
Another interesting study carried out by Haines et al. (2007) assessed participants’ 
preference on three different reverberation techniques. These techniques included 
convolving the test audio samples with mono impulse responses, placed impulse 
responses, where impulse responses for each instrument depending on their position 
on a stage and a panned dry recording with a centre impulse response. They used 
three preference categories, realism, quality and personal preference to obtain 
subjective results. A paired comparison test was their test strategy to minimise the 
concerns due to participants’ ability to distinguish between the samples. Their study 
concluded that location-based convolution reverberation is a promising technique 
having a high realism over other techniques. They also stated that due to preference 
ratings being high on location-based reverberation, this technique has a real viability 
in the commercial realm. 
 
 
 
 


=== [p25] ===
 
19
3.0 Methodology 
 
 
3.1 Hardware 
 
In this section available hardware apparatus has been analysed in order to detect 
and use the most appropriate ones. Important data have been tabulated in order to 
show in a more convenient style. 
 
3.1.1.Microphones 
 
The two measurement microphones at TEE studios have been analysed for their 
frequency response in order to capture a linear IR of the corridor. In frequency 
response charts, Audix TM1 shows flatter response. Therefore, all the recordings 
including drum audio sample has been captured withTM1.  
 
 
Table 1 Available measurement microphones in TEE studios  
Available Measurement 
Microphones 
Frequency Response 
Polar Pattern 
Audix TM1 
20 Hz - 25 kHz +/-2dB 
Omni-directional 
Behringer ECM8000 
20 Hz - 20 kHz +/-5dB 
Omni-directional 
 
3.1.2 Loudspeakers 
 
Most of the available monitor loudspeakers at TEE studios have been analysed for 
their frequency responses in order to reproduce flat playback of the recorded drum 
sample and sine sweeps for collection of impulse responses. Through in-depth 
research Tannoy has been the most suitable loudspeaker for the application. As well 
as its near-flat frequency response, it is capable of reproducing efficient playback of 
low-end frequencies as low as 33 Hz, where the competitors HS5 and Rokit 5’’ are 
capable of 54 Hz and 45 Hz respectively. This low frequency response is extremely 
important as the designed audio test sample being a drum kit containing a kick drum.  


=== [p26] ===
 
20
 
 
Table 2 Available monitor loudspeakers in TEE studios 
Available Monitor Loudspeakers 
Frequency Response 
Tannoy Ellipse 10 iDP 
33 Hz – 50 kHz +/- 1.5 dB 
Yamaha HS5 
54 Hz – 30 kHz +/- 10 dB 
KRK Rokit 5’’ 
45 Hz – 35 kHz +/- 10 dB 
 
 
3.1.3 Audio interfaces 
 
Portable audio interfaces available in TEE studios have been analysed. Most 
important specifications are detailed below. Input and output frequency responses 
are as important as microphones and loudspeakers. In this category Saffire Pro has 
shown the least effect on responses. M-box mini 2 has failed the test as it only 
accommodates only a headphone output. Signal to noise ratio (SNR) is important in 
terms of capability of reproducing and recording clear signals. Saffire Pro has a far 
better SNR than the other competitor, Fast Track Pro. The last test category, digital 
conversion specifications, has made it obvious that Saffire Pro is the most 
appropriate interface to for recording and reproduction purposes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p27] ===
 
21
Table 3 Available portable audio interfaces 
Available 
Portable 
Interfaces 
Input 
Frequency 
Response 
Output 
Frequency 
Response 
A/D – D/A 
Conversion 
Multiple 
Outputs
? 
Signal to 
Noise 
Ratio 
M-Audio Fast 
Track Pro 
 
20 Hz – 20 
kHz, +/- 0.2 dB 
20 Hz – 20 kHz, 
+/- 0.2 dB 
16 Bit  
48 kHz 
Yes 
-102 dB 
M-Audio M-
Box Mini 2 
 
20 Hz – 20 
kHz, +/- 0.1 dB  
20 Hz – 20 kHz, 
+/- 0.25 dB 
24 Bit 
44.1, 48 
kHz 
No 
Not 
specified 
Focusrite 
Saffire Pro 
 
20 Hz – 20 
kHz, +/- 0.1 dB 
20 Hz – 20 kHz, 
+/- 0.1 dB 
24 Bit 
96 kHz 
Yes 
-105.3 dB 
 
 
 
3.2 Software 
 
This section provides information and comparison about alternative software for 
programming, capturing IR’s and analysis uses. Each software have been analysed 
for their advantages and limitations in order to detect most applicable ones. 
Justifications have been made towards the usefulness, user-friendliness and material 
costs in order to save time, effort and money.   
 
3.2.1 Programming 
 
Although programming software platform has been defined for this project as 
Max/MSP in the project aims, a research has been made to find alternative ones to 
justify the selection. A range of audio synthesis software is given below. First 
category for comparison deals with the cost of the software. In this sense, Reaktor 
has been eliminated in the first stage due to budget constraints where it is 
unattainable neither on TEE computers nor on author’s personal computer. 
Max/MSP being reachable on TEE computers eliminates the need for a purchase. 
Another concern is the native platform of the software. Byond, being only available 
for Windows computers makes it almost impossible to use as the author’s personal 


=== [p28] ===
 
22
computer running Mac OSX and permission and stability of installing software on 
TEE computers is not known. The last and the most important criteria is the 
programming language used by the software. The language required is a real issue 
where, if the author is not familiar with it, it will consume much time and much effort. 
In this case, Faust and SuperCollider requiring functional and dynamic programming 
respectively are eliminated due to author’s theoretical and practical knowledge 
constraints. The remaining software Pure Data and Max/MSP are the most 
convenient ones to use. In retrospect, Max/MSP has been the fundamental software 
used in Sound Synthesis UG2 and Digital Audio Effects UG3 modules. This makes 
Max/MSP a more advantageous environment compared to Pure Data. 
 
 
Table 4 possible programming software comparisons 
Software 
Cost 
Language 
Platform 
Faust 
Free 
Functional 
programming 
Linux, Mac 
OSX, Windows, 
Unix 
Pure Data 
Free 
Visual programming 
Cross-Platform 
Max/MSP v.5 
$400, available on 
TEE computers 
Visual programming 
Windows, Mac 
OSX 
SuperCollider 
Free 
Dynamic 
programming 
Linux, Mac 
OSX, Windows, 
FreeBSD 
Reaktor 
$399 
Conventional 
programming 
Windows, Mac 
OSX 
Byond 
Free 
C# 
Windows 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p29] ===
 
23
3.2.2 IR capturing 
 
In the table 5 some of the alternative impulse response capturing software are 
included. IR Utility is included in the Logic Pro software package, which is licensed 
on the author’s personal computer. Room EQ Wizard is a great tool for acoustical 
analysis of spaces. It includes sine sweep method for capturing impulse responses 
but does not involve a deconvolution function. FuzzMeasure Pro 2 is free to use but it 
does not involve a deconvolve function in this version rather it is included in Pro 3 
version where it is priced for $90 for educational use. Therefore most applicable 
software is IR Utility. The advantage of sine sweep method is justified later on in this 
chapter. 
 
Table 5 Possible impulse response capturing software 
Software 
Platform 
Method(s) 
Cost 
Deconvolve? 
File type 
IR Utility 
Mac OSX 
Sine Sweep Included in 
Logic Pro 
Yes 
.aiff, .wav 
Room EQ 
Wizard 
Mac OSX, 
Windows 
Sine Sweep Free 
No 
- 
FuzzMeasure Mac OSX 
Sine Sweep Pro 2 
Version: 
Free  
Pro 3 
Version 
Educational 
Use: $90 
Not in Pro 2 
version 
.aiff, .wav 
 
 
 
3.2.3 Spectrum Analysis 
 
A range of spectrum analysis software have been analysed in order to detect most 
appropriate ones. Through analysis Sonic Visualiser has been found to be the most 
appropriate software offering flexible settings to view the spectrogram of the signals. 
Another advantage of this software is that, it is free to download and it offers versions 


=== [p30] ===
 
24
for Mac OSX. The ease of use of this software was another advantage saving the 
time needed to learn how to use.  
 
3.3 Plugin Design 
 
Initial design procedure for the creation of plugin has started with analysing available 
max objects and concepts towards creating a convolution reverb plugin. As 
described earlier target plugin will use non-uniform partitioned convolution method in 
order to achieve near zero latency convolution in frequency domain. Therefore 
transformation of a signal from time domain to frequency domain is the first goal. In 
order to achieve this, typical max objects are analysed. Max/MSP’s pfft~ object is a 
tool designed for spectral audio processing that uses Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) 
to transform time domain signals into frequency domain. The object works as a sub-
patch containing fftin~ and ifftout~ objects which determine the number of inputs and 
outputs of its mother-patch. Using these objects one can process any signal in its 
frequency domain. The object fft~ outputs a stream of real and imaginary numbers 
where ifft~ expects these. These values are Cartesian coordinates where vertical 
axis is the real part and horizontal axis is the imaginary part. In order to work with 
signals amplitude and phase components there are two ways to compute. Those 
Cartesian coordinates are transformed into polar coordinates by cartopol~ objects 
(poltocar~ for polar coordinates into Cartesian coordinates). Another way to compute 
phase and amplitude is to use complex multiplications, which is a method that takes 
less CPU power. 
 
Figure 3.4.1 below shows the first prototypes created using this method. Prototype 
on the right shows a method for using less CPU power. First inlet (fftin~ 1) into the 
sub-patch loads the input signal and the second inlet (fftin~ 2) loads the impulse 
response. 
 
Fig. 3.4.1 First Prototypes for convolution 


=== [p31] ===
 
25
 
Using the prototypes shown above one can convolve a signal with another signal 
however; these methods are not practical for a real time convolution. Instead 
alternative external objects are needed. 
 
The most efficient externals found through research are part of Alex Harker 
Max/MSP externals (2011). The two external objects named partconvolve~ and 
timeconvolve~ copies the impulse response from a buffer and performs partitioned 
convolution to an incoming signal. Real-time convolution can be achieved when 
partconvolve~ is used in combination with timeconvolve~ with correct attributes. The 
attributes needed to state are fftsize, offset, length and chan. These attributes are 
needed in order to set the partitioning scheme.  
 
Figure 3.4.2 shows convolution sub-patch for left channel that is used inside the final 
patch named Corridor Reverb. Inlet 1 loads the input signal and inlet 2 loads the 
impulse response where they are sent to following partconvolve~ and timeconvolve~ 
objects. The object timeconvolve~ is used for the first partition where the block size is 
128 samples thus, convolution in time domain is faster. Series of partconvolve~ 
objects are attributed in exponentially increasing block sizes as Gardner (1995) 
suggests. The outlets of these objects are sent to series of signal summation objects 
in order add overlapping blocks. In the final stage, summed signal is sent to the 
outlet of the sub-patch into the mother-patch Corridor Reverb for mixing stage. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.4.2 Convolution sub-patch for the left channel 
 


=== [p32] ===
 
26
The patching mode of final patch Corridor Reverb is shown in the fig.  below. The 
object sfplay~ 2 loads the user-selected input signal buffered by open object into the 
patch. The object buffer~ contains the impulse response that has been recorded in 
the corridor leading to semi-anechoic chamber in Millenium Point building of 
Birmingham City University. Mixing stage of the patch contains a live.dial object for 
setting the amount of the wet signal to a line~ object where it sends a control signal 
whose amplitude is set by ‘Wetness’ to be multiplied by the wet signal and the dry 
signal.   
 
 
 
Fig. 3.4.3 Working patch with the mixing stage present 
 
 
 
3.4 Impulse response capture methodology 
 
Exponential sine sweep method, as stated in the literature review section, has been 
accommodated for capturing of the impulse responses due to the method having 
greatest signal to noise ratio. The most important element of this activity has been 
ensuring dry audio sample was also recorded with every source-receiver position of 
the recording of the impulse response. The importance of this element is due to 
offering smallest variation for test purposes.  
 


=== [p33] ===
 
27
Prior to the recordings, the software has been calibrated so that hardware has least 
effect on the recorded impulse response. Another important precaution was using 
acoustically absorbent stands for microphone and speaker. This is due to vibrations 
travelling from loudspeaker stand reach to the microphone stand before the pressure 
waves reaching the diaphragm wherefore sound waves travelling at a faster rate in 
denser materials. 
 
As stated earlier IR Utility was employed for the auralisation of the corridor reverb. 
Tannoy loudspeaker has been used as the source, positioned in one end of the 
corridor, facing the other end with equal distances from the sidewalls. The 
microphone, Audix TM1, was positioned in various distances from the loudspeaker 
pointing upwards.  
 
 
3.5 Anechoic chamber recordings 
 
Audio test sample was recorded in BCU’s semi-anechoic chamber in order to capture 
a signal that has the least reverberation. Instrument chosen for this recording was a 
drum kit comprising of a kick drum, a snare and a ride cymbal. The instrument has 
two advantages in terms of testing. Each element of the drum kit has their spectrum 
in different spectral bands. The bass drum covers low-end and low mid, snare covers 
low mid and high mid and ride cymbal covers high mid and high-end spectral bands. 
This coverage is important in terms of assessing the reverberation for a wide range 
spectrum. Another advantage is that the instrument is percussive which will ease the 
perception of reflections for assessing the characteristics of the reverberation. An 
alternative instrument could be a piano where it is still a percussive instrument that 
can cover a wide range spectrum. Another advantage of drum kit opposed to a piano 
is its ease of transportation. 
 
Microphone employed for this recording session was the Audix TM1. This is due to 
the microphone having least coloration on the recorded sound as stated earlier and 
also its polar pattern being omni-directional. Position for the microphone was set by 
trial. The most appropriate position for the microphone was discovered by 
examination of the spectrum via real-time analyser while drummer was playing the 
beat. Equal magnitude over the spectrum was the most important principle for this 


=== [p34] ===
 
28
test. After several trials, the most appropriate position was found to be 30 cm above 
the bass drum in between the snare and the ride cymbal. 
 
The beat composed for the recording was in 4/4 time signatures, playing each 
element of the kit on separate times to ensure each hit can be perceived distinctly. 
 
 
 
3.6 Experimental design 
 
The initial research on the assessment methods of perceptual quality of artificial 
reverberation in 2.7 showed that most reliable way to assess these qualities is the 
careful design of listening tests. Another reason for the need for subjective listening 
tests is that, as Extra et al. (2006) stated, objective measures for perceptual qualities 
being less effective on reflecting healthy results. Thus, the experimental design of 
this study shall fulfil careful design of testing criteria allowing participants to assess 
the qualities of techniques in predetermined objective metrics. These objective 
metrics should be intuitive to allow the administration to be able to use naïve 
participants as well as semi-professionals in the field. The importance of selecting 
the subject pool is another aspect. Although Haines et al. (2007) points out that 
demographics of the subjects has no expected effect on the results, noting the 
personal backgrounds of participants is a convenience when analysing the results to 
show possible correlations. Another important precaution mentioned by Marui (2007) 
that there were no known auditory health issues of their subjects.  
 
The author believes that the gender of the participants has lesser effect on the 
results than the age. This is due to the fact that hearing spectrum range of the 
humans become narrower with respect to age; thus, subject pool of ages in 
between18 and 26 is selected. 
 
Dry sound samples chosen for these tests are justified above in 3.6, anechoic drum 
music, should be generated so that a control signal was paired with the convolved 
signal. In order to generate this control signal, the anechoic drum sample has been 
played from the Tannoy loudspeaker in the corridor and recorded in the same setup 
and source-receiver positions for a fair control signal. This signal has been named as 


=== [p35] ===
 
29
Chamber Reverb and given the symbol ‘B’. The test signal has been given the name 
Convolution Reverb and given the symbol ‘A’ hereafter. Both signals have been 
equalised for 0 dB peak amplitudes in order to minimise the effects of processing.  
 
Test methodology chosen for the test is the categorical pair-wise comparison test. 
Three preference categories were identified similar to the strategy followed by 
Haines et al. (2007). These categories were: realism, defined as the likeliness to 
actual reverberations that take place in a real space, quality and personal 
preference, defined as ‘which technique do you would prefer to use for reverberating 
a signal’. Personal preference category allowed participants to state the reason for 
their preference optionally. These statements may help the administration to identify 
the perceptual differences in an informal way. 
 
A questionnaire has been prepared for the listening test with naïve subjects in mind. 
This was realised by stating the definitions of reverberant sound field and 
reverberation from Audio Engineering Society’s (AES) Acoustical Terms Dictionary. 
Tabulation was designed for intuitive recording of the responses. Also each category 
was defined prior to the test on the questionnaire to ensure each subject understood 
the parameters. Instructions were written on the questionnaire to minimise the 
administration needs and to ensure each subject received the same information 
ensuring a fair test for all subjects. The questionnaire can be seen in the appendix 
section. 
 
The most appropriate environment for a test of this nature is the semi-anechoic 
chamber in Millennium Point. However access to this facility is restricted to the staff 
where students are expected to access with the studio manager. Another issue was 
the TEE’s procedure for non-students entering the faculty. Non-students are 
expected to be informed to security staff three days prior to the entry for recording 
purposes. These limitations made the use of semi-anechoic chamber for listening 
tests impractical. The solution found was using a portable high quality sound 
interface card with flat frequency response headphones for the realisation of listening 
tests. The solution eliminated the need for an anechoic environment due to subjects 
listening the material on headphones. 
 


=== [p36] ===
 
30
In order to avoid bias, listening tests have been carried out in single blind fashion that 
is subjects were informed that they were comparing different reverberation 
techniques without knowing the nature of techniques. Subjects were told to read the 
questionnaire first, then to set the volume to a comfortable level that would stay the 
same through the test. In order to avoid perspective loss, subjects were told to listen 
to the samples as minimum times as they would need to.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p37] ===
 
31
4.0 Results 
 
 
 
4.1 Spectral tests’ results 
 
 
Fig. 4.1.1 Spectrogram view of the bass drum (chamber recording)  
 
Fig. 2.1.2 Spectrogram view of the bass drum (convolved signal) 


=== [p38] ===
 
32
 
 
Fig. 4.1.3 Spectrogram view of the snare (chamber recording) 
 
 
Fig. 4.1.4 Spectrogram view of the snare (convolved signal) 
 


=== [p39] ===
 
33
 
Fig. 4.1.5 Spectrogram view of the ride cymbal (chamber recording) 
 
Fig. 4.1.6 Spectrogram view of the ride cymbal (convolved signal) 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p40] ===
 
34
4.2 Listening tests 
 
This section presents results from subjective listening tests. There are 23 subjects 
participated in the tests. As stated earlier ‘A’ stands for the convolution reverb and ‘B’ 
stands for chamber reverb (chamber reverb). Also in the table *** convolution reverb 
is referred sample 1 and chamber reverb is referred to as sample 2.  
 
Table 6 Individual listening test responses with ID numbering 
Subject 
ID 
Realism 
Quality 
Preference 
1  A 
A 
A 
2  B 
B 
B 
3  A 
A 
A 
4  B 
B 
B 
5  B 
B 
B 
6  B 
B 
B 
7  A 
B 
B 
8  A 
B 
B 
9  B 
B 
B 
10  B 
A 
B 
11  A 
B 
B 
12  B 
B 
B 
13  A 
A 
A 
14  B 
B 
A 
15  B 
B 
B 
16  A 
B 
B 
17  A 
A 
A 
18  A 
B 
B 
19  B 
B 
B 
20  B 
B 
A 
21  A 
A 
A 


=== [p41] ===
 
35
22  A 
A 
A 
23  A 
A 
A 
 
 
 
The table above shows the individual choices of participants for each category. 
Subjects are given numbers ID numbers.  
 
Table 7 Participants’ comments on their personal preference choices 
Subject ID Preference 
1 Sample 1 sounds more nonsynthetic 
2 Sample 2 fits the personal preference for drum reverb 
3 Sample 1, better mixture of separate elements 
4 Sample 2, no big difference. 
5 Sample 2, no big difference 
6 Sample 2,No big difference 
7 Sample 2 sounds brighter 
8 Sample 2 sounds cleaner, more distinguishable 
9 Sample 2, no big difference 
10 Sample 2 feels more roomy 
11 Sample 2, more distinct cymbal sound 
12 Sample 2, sounds brighter 
13 Sample 1, sounds more powerful 
14 Sample 1, better distinguishable sound 
15 Sample 2, sounds more authentic 
16 Sample 2, sounds more lively in the low-end and high-end is clearer 
17 Sample 1, sounds warmer 
18 Sample 2, sounds brighter 
19 Sample 2, sounds brighter 
20 Sample 1, better sounding 
21 Sample 1, sounds more synchronizing 
22 Sample 1 (no reasoning) 
23 Sample 1 (no reasoning) 
 


=== [p42] ===
 
36
 
 
As stated earlier in the 3.7 subjects are given the option to state the reasons of their 
personal preferences. All the participants responded to this optional request except 
two subjects. They are labelled as ‘(no reasoning)’. ID numbers in this table are listed 
in order with respect to the previous table.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.2.1 Realism category responses shown as frequency on pie chart  
 
 
 
Fig. 4.2.2 Quality category responses shown as frequency on pie chart 
Corridor 
Reverb  
48% 
Natural 
Reverb 
52% 
Realism 
Corridor 
Reverb  
39% 
Natural 
Reverb 
61% 
Quality 


=== [p43] ===
 
37
 
 
Fig. 4.2.3 Personal preference category shown as frequency on pie chart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Corridor 
Reverb  
39% 
Natural 
Reverb 
61% 
Preference 


=== [p44] ===
 
38
5.0 Discussions and analysis 
 
 
The main aim of this project was to build a convolution reverb plugin and to 
investigate the quality of convolution reverb by spectrum analysis and listening tests. 
This was done by collection of an impulse response from a chamber to convolve with 
a musical excerpt. For the test purposes same anechoic musical excerpt was 
recorded in the chamber by using the same equipment and setup. For objective 
measure purposes both signals’ spectrograms were plotted using the software Sonic 
Visualiser with same settings for each pair to compare the responses fairly. For 
subjective assessment purposes carefully designed and administered listening tests 
were realised. The results of spectrogram analysis and listening tests were shown in 
4.1 and 4.2 respectively. These results are analysed and discussed in the following 
sections.  
 
As reviewed in the literature review section, none of the earlier studies concentrated 
on the perceived quality of convolution reverb compared to chamber reverb, the 
experiments were rather focusing on digital artificial reverberation techniques. Thus 
expectations of the results of the experiments were not conclusive. This also resulted 
in a deficiency to relate the results obtained to a certain reason. However the same 
reason, lack of similar studies, was a great motivation for the completion of this 
project. 
 
5.1 Analysis of spectrogram results 
 
Spectrogram views are healthy representations of the magnitude, shown over a time 
vs. frequency plot. These views of the frequency domain of a signal are promising 
representations to analyse the differences of the responses of systems for the input 
signal. The results of these tests can be used to identify the perceptual differences 
that effected participants’ preferences.  
 
Results from the chamber recording show denser magnitude dispersion in the low 
frequency region in the bass drum tests. It also shows higher magnitude response in 
the same region. Another interesting result is that energy decay in the chamber 
recording is rather smooth in the region below 80 Hz. This decay forms earlier for the 


=== [p45] ===
 
39
higher frequency bands where above the 4kHz range, the magnitude response 
becomes rather scarce. Interestingly in the mid range, 1.5 kHz – 4 kHz, both the 
magnitude response and the energy decay is more present in the convolved signal. 
 
In the snare spectrograms, the dense dispersion of the magnitude in the 3 kHz – 9 
kHz range is intense in the chamber recording. Energy decay differences can be 
clearly seen between the two spectrograms. In the 14 kHz - 19 kHz region, there is 
obvious magnitude differences. The decay of energy in the same region is similar 
until a point where, in the convolved signal, there is a quite rate of decay. However 
this decay is not present in the range below 10 kHz. 
 
Cymbal recording spectrograms show a obvious difference of the dispersion of 
energy. The dense energy lines, which are the harmonics of the fundamental 
frequency of the ride cymbal, are clearer for the convolved signal. This shows that 
magnitude dispersion is weaker as opposed to the chamber recording. There is also 
an obvious difference of magnitude response for the frequency bands over 8 kHz. In 
this region, energy decay is rather at a faster rate in the spectrogram of the 
convolved signal.  
 
Observations over the spectrogram views show poor energy decays of the 
convolution reverb plugin, especially for the higher frequency bands. Although early 
energy decays for the low frequencies match the opposing natural reverb 
characteristics, response to the high mid frequencies in this time region is rather 
weak.  
 
 
 
5.2 Analysis of subjective test results 
 
Prior to analysis of the listening test results, it should be mentioned that due to small 
population of participants, statistical significance tests were not carried out. Also due 
to tests being performed only once for each person, there is no need for a confidence 
interval or binomial distribution computation. 
 


=== [p46] ===
 
40
Hypothesis for comparison of realism of two reverberation techniques was that 
convolution reverb could emulate true characteristics of the reverberation chamber. 
This was due to the fact that an impulse response contains realistic reflection of a 
linear time-invariant system’s response to any input signal. Subjects preferring 
convolution reverb for this category form 48% of the total population with the size of 
11 out of 23 total responses. Results from the subjective listening tests for this 
category show that hypothesis is proved, which means subjects were unable to 
distinguish the quality of realism from either sample. 
 
Quality category asked the participants to state their preference of the reverberation 
techniques proposed. A frequency of 61% of the participants stated that sample B 
(chamber reverb) has higher quality than sample A (corridor reverb). A reason for 
this result can be the plugin’s poor response for the high mid frequency bands. 
Another reason for this result can be the plugin’s faster energy decay for the high 
frequency bands, which may be perceived as lower quality in terms of reflecting 
higher frequency bands of reflections. 
 
Personal preference category asked the participants to state their personal choices 
of reverberation techniques. This resulted in 61% of the population preferring 
chamber reverb. An interesting fact is that, 56.5% from 61% total preferences for 
chamber reverb also preferred the same technique in the quality category. This 
shows an obvious relation of quality to personal preference on the choices. The 
relation shows that perceived quality of reverberation has a great influence on 
personal preference. Alternative or rather main reasoning for this relation can be 
drawn from faster decay rates of high frequency of convolution reverb plugin.  
 
Optional request for reasons of the participants’ personal preferences has been 
yielded a range of answers that helped to identify the nature of their personal 
preference. Responses to the question by individuals with ID numbers: 7, 11, 12, 
16,18 and19, shown that 35.7% of the personal preferences were chamber reverb 
because it sounded brighter. This obviously shows that results of spectrogram tests, 
plugins’ weak response to high frequency and faster decay rate at high mid 
frequencies are perceivable. Another outcome of these responses was that 17.4% of 
the participants stated that they perceived very little or no differences. 
 


=== [p47] ===
 
41
6.0 Conclusions 
 
In conclusion, the project aimed to cover the design of a convolution reverb plugin on 
MaxMSP and to evaluate the quality of convolution reverb with respect to 
spectrogram analysis and analysis of listening tests that has been carried out. The 
plugin was designed using non-uniform partitioned convolution method for real-time 
purposes. The designed plugin has been successful, convolving the input signal with 
an impulse response recorded from a chamber in Millennium Point campus of 
Birmingham City University with near zero latency. In order to fulfil the second part of 
the aim of this report, an anechoic drum sample has been recorded in the semi-
anechoic chamber. This signal was then recorded in the chamber using the same 
equipment and setup, in order to create a testing material for the comparison of the 
different methods for testing the quality of the convolution reverb purposes.  
 
In order to achieve the first objective, extensive research has been carried out in the 
areas of digital signal processing, artificial reverberation techniques, real-time 
convolution methods and methods for testing the quality of artificial reverberation. 
The second objective was to design a fast convolution plugin on MaxMSP, which has 
been achieved by implementing the multiple frequency delay line non uniform 
partitioned convolution method that has been researched. In order fulfil the next 
objective; exponential swept sine wave method has been used to capture the 
impulse response of the chamber. After this stage recorded impulse response has 
been applied to the plugin with the anechoic signal recorded in semi-anechoic 
chamber to test the plugin. After the succession of this objective extensive research 
has been carried out in the subject of perceptual quality evaluation of artificial 
reverberation techniques by identifying the earlier studies and observing the methods 
tested. After this stage, testing methodology has been created for listening tests. 
Listening tests were carried out with over 23 participants and results of these tests 
are analysed. In order to measure the quality objectively, spectrogram views of the 
signals have been visualised.  
 
Results of the objective tests show that the convolution reverberation had 
shortcomings in the higher frequency spectrum range that was, faster decay of the 
energy than the chamber reverb technique which was sometimes referred to as 
original reverb. The reason for this result has not been identified clearly, but the 


=== [p48] ===
 
42
possible justifications were made towards the impulse response capturing method. 
However testing of the alternative impulse response capturing methods was not the 
scope of this project, further studies should resonate in these tests.  
 
Results of the subjective tests showed a clear relation to the shortcoming of the 
convolution reverb discussed earlier. That is, 35.7% of the participants who preferred 
chamber reverb technique justified that this technique was brighter sounding than the 
other technique. Interestingly realism category has verified null hypothesis, that they 
were unable to define which technique has a higher realism. This result showed that 
the convolution reverb could realistically emulate a space, which was the hypothesis 
at the initial stages of the project.  
 
Overall, the aim of this project has been achieved with activities planned for the 
achievement of the demanding objectives. Recommendations for further studies are 
presented in 7.0.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p49] ===
 
43
7.0 Recommendations 
 
This project supplies a firm starting point for further investigations, as the specified 
scope was rather limiting. Recommendations for further research are: 
 
• 
Investigations into alternative impulse response capturing methods are 
needed to provide further auralisation approaches in order to test the quality 
of convolution with the new methods. 
• 
Further investigations into perceptual audio quality testing in order to design 
more reliable subjective testing criteria for realisation of the qualities 
associated with perception of the reverberation. 
• 
Identifying and using better hardware for more realistic auralisation 
approaches. 
• 
Additionally the scope can be extended, covering the recommendations 
stated above to re-design and repeat the activities for identification of the 
problems raised in this project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p50] ===
 
44
 
List of References 
 
 
Bateman, A. and Paterson-Stephens, I. (2002). The DSP Handbook: 
Algorithms, Applications and Design Techniques. Harlow: Pearson Education 
Limited. Pages 499-509. 
 
 
Battenberg E. and Avizienis, R. (2011). Implementing real-time partition 
convolution algorithms on conventional operating systems. 14th International 
Conference on Digital Audio Effects (DaFX-11) proceedings, Paris, 
September (2011). 
 
 
Czyzewski, A. and Sankiewicz, M. (1988). Subjective Methods for the 
Assessing Properties of Artificial Reverberation. Technical University Gdansk, 
Poland. Presented at the 84th Convention, Paris, March 1988. 
 
 
Czyzewski, A. (1990). A Method of Artificial Reverberation Quality Testing. 
Journal of Audio Engineering Society, Vol. 38, No.3, March 1990.   
 
 
Dennis, R. (2001). Advanced Recording Primer. Last accessed on 15/05/2014 
from: http://www.recordinginstitute.com/da154/ARP/chap3Sig/0308hist.html 
 
 
Everest, F. A. and Pohlmann K. C. (2009). Master Handbook of Acoustics, 
fifth edition, USA, McGraw-Hill Companies. 
 
 
Extra, D.; Simmer, U.; Fischer, S. and Bitzer, J. (2006). Artiﬁcial 
Reverberation: Comparing algorithms by using monaural analysis tools. Audio 


=== [p51] ===
 
45
Engineering Society, 121st Convention, San Francisco, CA, USA, October 
2006. 
 
 
Gardner, W. G. (1995). Efficient Convolution without Input-Output Delay. 
Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, Vol. 43 (3), Pages 127-136. 
 
Haines, W. D.; Vernon, J. R.; Dannenberg R. B.; Driessen P. F. (2007). 
Placement of Sound Sources in the Stereo Field Using Measured Room 
Impulse Responses. In R. Kronland-Martinet, S. Ystad, and K. Jensen (Eds.): 
Computer Music Modelling and Retrieval. Sense of Sounds, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science LNCS 4969, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 
Pages 276-287, 2008. 
 
 
Harker, A. (2011). A. Harker Externals for MaxMSP. Last accessed on 
15/05/2014 from: www.alexanderjharker.co.uk/Software.html  
 
 
Howard, D. M. and Angus, J. A. S. (2009). Acoustics and Psychoacoustics, 
fourth edition, Great Britain, Focal Press, Elsevier Ltd. 
 
 
Kirk, R. and Hunt, A. (1999). Digital Sound Processing for Music and 
Mulitmedia. Oxford, Focal Press. Pages 165-167. 
 
 
Lehmann, S. (1996). Reverberation. Last accessed on 15/05/2014 from: 
 http://www.harmony- central.com/Effects/Articles/Reverb/  
 
 


=== [p52] ===
 
46
Lockhart, G. B. and Cheetham, B. M. G. (1989). Basic Digital Signal 
Processing. Published by Batterworths, 1989.  
 
 
Lynn, P. A. and Fuerst, W. (1994). Introductory Digital Signal Processing with 
Computer Applications. Published by Wiley, Chichester, 1994. Available at 
Millennium Point. 
 
 
Lyons, R. G. (2004). Understanding Digital Signal Processing. 2nd edition, 
Prentice Hall Published Upper Saddle River, N.J., 2004. 
Manolakis, D. G. and Ingle, V. K. (2011). Applied Digital Signal Processing. 
First edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2011. 
 
 
Marui, A. (2007). Perceptual Categories of Artificial Reverberation for 
Headphone Reproduction of Music. Audio Engineering Society, convention 
paper 723, 123rd Convention, New York, NY, October 2007. 
 
 
Mommertz, E. (2009). Acoustics and Sound Insulation. First edition, published 
by Aumuller Druck. Regensburg, 2009. 
 
 
Moorer, J. (1979). About this Reverberation Business. Computer Music 
Journal, Vol. 3, Pages  
13–28. 
 
 
Marven, C. and Ewers, G. (1996). A Simple Approach to Digital Signal 
Processing. 
Volume 8 of Topics in digital signal processing, published by Wiley, original 


=== [p53] ===
 
47
from the University of California. 
 
 
Muller-Tomfelde, C. (1999). Low-Latency Convolution for Real-Time 
Applications. Audio Engineering Society 16th International Conference. No. 
16-040. March 1999. 
 
 
Peters, R. J., Smith, B. J. and Hollins, M. (2013). Acoustics and Noise 
Control, third edition, New York, Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
 
 
Robjohns, H. (1997). Space: Reverb first principles. Last accessed on 
15/05/2014 from: 
http://www.soundonsound.com/sos/1997_articles/mar97/reverbbasics.html  
 
 
Rumsey, F. and McCormick, T. (2006). Sound and Recording, sixth edition, 
Great Britain, Focal Press, Elsevier Ltd. 
 
 
Schroeder, M.R. (1961). Improved Quasi-Stereophony and Colourless 
Artificial Reverberation. Journal of Audio Engineering Society. Volume 9, 
Number 3. New York. Pages 192-197. 
 
 
Schroeder, M.R. (1962). Natural-Sounding Artificial Reverberation. Journal of 
Audio Engineering Society. Volume 10, Number 3. New York. Pages 219-223. 
 
 
Smith, S. W. (1997). The Scientist and Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal 
Processing. California Technical Publishing, San Diego. 


=== [p54] ===
 
48
 
 
Smith, S. W. (2003). Digital Signal Processing: A Practical Guide for 
Engineers and Scientists. Newnes, Elsevier Science, the USA. 
 
 
White, P. (2006). Choosing the Right Reverb: How best to use different 
reverbs, Sound on Sound (SOS) journal, March 2006. Last accessed on 
15/05/2014 from: 
http://www.soundonsound.com/sos/mar06/articles/usingreverb.htm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== [p55] ===
 
49
Appendix: A Listening Test Questionnaire 
 
Comparison of Different Reverberation Techniques 
 
This listening test is designed to compare two different techniques of 
reverberating an audio signal. Comparison categories are defined below. There 
are two different samples in the audio file provided named respectively Sample 
No: 1 and Sample No: 2.  
 
Reverberant sound field: The sound in an enclosed or partially enclosed space 
that has been reflected repeatedly or continuously from the boundaries.  
 
Reverberation: The persistence of sound in an enclosed or partially enclosed 
space after the source of sound has stopped; by extension, in some contexts, the 
sound that so persists.  
 
*Definitions are taken from Audio Engineering Society’ s Acoustical Term’s Dictionary. 
 
There are three comparison categories:  
 
 Realism: Which reverberation technique sounds more realistic? 
 
 Quality: Which reverberation technique has a higher quality? 
 
 Personal Preference: Which reverberation technique do you prefer? 
 
Instructions: 
 
I. Listen to the audio file provided.  
II. Compare the samples with respect to category definitions and state your 
answer by simply adding ‘X’ into the relevant cell. 
III. (Optional) State why do you prefer your selection in the personal 
preference category. 
 
Comparison 
Categories 
Sample No: 1 
Sample: No: 2 


=== [p56] ===
 
50
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Realism 
 
 
 
Quality 
 
 
 
Personal Preference 
 
A: 
 
B: 
  
 
I prefer Sample No: 1 
 
I prefer Sample No: 2 
 


=== [p57] ===
 
51
Appendix: B Digital Files 
 
Digital files are uploaded to the Moodle, as a single .zip file 
